Clarify storage layout. (#10860)
ethereum/solidity: docs/internals/layout_in_storage.rst

.. _storage-inplace-encoding:

State variables of contracts are stored in storage in a compact way such
that multiple values sometimes use the same storage slot.
Except for dynamically-sized arrays and mappings (see below), data is stored
contiguously item after item starting with the first state variable,
which is stored in slot ``0``. For each variable,

> a size in bytes is determined according to its type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its size in bytes is determined according to its type.
```
?

Author: is 32 the size of a mapping?

Reviewer: Fair enough... ``the required size``? Just "a size" sounds a bit weird to me. But also fine ;-).

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I even wanted to suggest `the size` myself but I saw that @ekpyron already made a suggestion so I removed it.

It could say something like `the size of the space taken in the contiguous block` but that's way too long.

> Multiple, contiguous items that need less than 32 bytes are packed into a single

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multiple, contiguous items that need less than 32 bytes taken together are packed into a single
```

Author: That's actually not what I meant (two times 16 would also be fine).

Reviewer 2: Oh, maybe I misunderstood this? I thought this sentence says that if you have several items, the "groups" that together take 32 bytes or less get packed into a single slot (with additional rules clarfied below).

Or do you just mean that there should also be `no more than` instead of `less than`?

storage slot if possible, according to the following rules:

- The first item in a storage slot is stored lower-order aligned.
- Value types use only as many bytes as are necessary to store them.
- If a value type does not fit the remaining part of a storage slot, it is stored in the next storage slot.

> - Structs and array data always start a new slot and their items are packed tightly according to these rules.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean that e.g. `uint116[5]` will take 3 slots and its items will be stored like this?
```
[uint118, uint118, unused 2 bytes]
[uint118, uint118, unused 2 bytes]
[uint118, unused 17 bytes        ]
```

Author: yes

Reviewer 2: Ok. I now see that there's a sentence below about items smaller than 16 bytes that clarifies this.

- Items following struct or array data always start a new storage slot.

For contracts that use inheritance, the ordering of state variables is determined by the
C3-linearized order of contracts starting with the most base-ward contract. If allowed
by the above rules, state variables from different contracts do share the same storage slot.

> The elements of structs and arrays are stored after each other, just as if they were given

Reviewer 3: Does `stored after each other` mean stored in separate storage slots or packed tightly as per rules above?

Author: I hoped that "just as if they were given..." would clarify that question...

Reviewer 3: Hmm... it is still a bit vague at least for me. Perhaps `just as if they were declared outside the struct`?

Reviewer: Actually, I also still find this sentence a bit confusing... isn't this covered by the "rules above" - or respectively wouldn't it be covered, if the ``contiguous items that need less than 32 bytes`` in front of those rules was dropped?

as individual values.

.. warning::
    When using elements that are smaller than 32 bytes, your contract's gas usage may be higher.
    This is because the EVM operates on 32 bytes at a time. Therefore, if the element is smaller
    than that, the EVM must use more operations in order to reduce the size of the element from 32
    bytes to the desired size.

    It might be beneficial to use reduced-size types if you are dealing with storage values
    because the compiler will pack multiple elements into one storage slot, and thus, combine
    multiple reads or writes into a single operation.
    If you are not reading or writing all the values in a slot at the same time, this can

>     also have the opposite effect, though: When one value is written to a multi-value storage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    have the opposite effect, though: When one value is written to a multi-value storage
```

Reviewer 3: I think mixing beneficial and opposite of beneficial is kind of confusing to the reader. Perhaps better to be unequivocal and say `might have non beneficial effect.`

.. _storage-hashed-encoding:

> Due to their unpredictable size, mappings and dynamically-sized array types cannot be stored

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Due to their unknown size, mappings and dynamically-sized array types cannot be stored
```

Author: Hm, not sure about this. If you don't know the size of something but can put a reasonable upper bound on it, you might still store it in-place.

Reviewer 3: In the case of mappings and dynamically-sized arrays isn't the reason they are not stored in between because their size is unknown (because this value set at runtime)? I agree that in the hypothetical case where some data structure is bounded but exact size unknown, one could still store "in between" but that isn't the case here iiuc

Author: What about "Since their size is not fixed, mappings..."?

"in between" the state variables preceding and following them.
Instead, they are considered to occupy only 32 bytes with regards to the
:ref:`rules above <storage-inplace-encoding>` and the actual data of mappings and
dynamcically-sized arrays is stored starting at a different
storage slot that is computed using a Keccak-256 hash.

Assume the storage location of the mapping or array ends up being a slot ``p``
after applying :ref:`the storage layout rules <storage-inplace-encoding>`.
For dynamic arrays,
this slot stores the number of elements in the array (byte arrays and
strings are an exception, see :ref:`below <bytes-and-string>`).

> For mappings, the slot stays empty, but it is needed so that two mappings after each other will use a

Reviewer 3: Stays empty meaning zero initialized?

Author: Yes, but this is undefined. It's just not used for anything.

Reviewer 3: Should we include this info in the docs? Something like reading from this slot is undefined?

Author: I think this paragraph is enough documentation.

different hash distribution to store their data due to a different starting slot.

Array data is located starting at ``keccak256(p)`` and it is laid out in the same way as
statically-sized array data would: One element after the other, potentially sharing
storage slots if the elements are shorter than 32 bytes. Dynamic arrays of dynamic arrays apply this
rule recursively. The location of ``x[i][j]`` for ``x`` being ``uint32[][]`` is
computed as follows (again, assuming ``x`` itself is stored at slot ``p``):

> The slot is ``keccak256(keccak2569(p) + i) + floor(j / 8)`` (8 items per slot) and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The slot is ``keccak256(keccak256(p) + i) + floor(j / 8)`` (8 items per slot - 256/32 = 8) and
```

Reviewer 3: 8 items per slot because `256/32 = 8` i.e., tightly packed values?

> The slot is ``keccak256(keccak256(p) + i) + floor(j / 8)`` (8 items per slot - 256/32 = 8) and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The slot is ``keccak256(keccak256(p) + i) + floor(j / 8)`` (8 items per slot because 256/32 = 8) and
```

> the element can be obtained from the slot data ``v`` using ``(v >> ((j % 8) * 2)) & 0xffff``.

Reviewer 3: Let's say the uint32 values are 1, 2, 3. Each value is stored in 4 byte groups (32-bit) so the last 12 bytes look like `0x000100020003.` So, isn't the formula to obtain data `(v >> ((j % 8) * 8)) & 0xffffffff`?

Author: Right! Is the forumla useful?

Reviewer 3: Depends. If an "advanced" user wants to exploit this to reduce gas usage, maybe?

Reviewer 4: It's useful, I'm trying to look at internal contract state /nonpublic storage on chain so understanding that formula is necessary if you want to introspect values smaller than 32bytes

Reviewer 5: Hi I have a question.

what does `v` in ``(v >> ((j % 8) * 2)) & 0xffff`` refer to?

Also, why are we &ing with 0xffff? Is not anding with 0xffff same as the value that we are anding?

The value of a mapping key

> ``k`` is located at ``keccak256(k . p)`` where ``.`` is concatenation. The hash is always a hash of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``k`` is located at ``keccak256(k . p)`` where ``.`` is concatenation. The hash is always computed over
```

> 64 bytes. If the key type is shorter, it is padded with zeros according to its alignment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
64 input (`k.p`) bytes. If the key type is shorter, it is padded with zeros according to its alignment.
```

Author: Maybe the whole sentence should be rephrased - we should not use `k` in `keccak256(k . p)` if it is modified in some cases.

If the key type is ``string`` or ``bytes``, a ``keccak256`` hash of the string is first
computed to compress it to 32 bytes.

> If the mapping value is again a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the mapping value is a
```

> non-value type, the positions are found by adding an offset to ``keccak256(k . p)``.

Reviewer 4: might be worth putting a ref to https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.1/types.html#reference-types for convenience here, I had to google to make sure I knew what a non-value type was (though I was definitely assuming it was non-primitives e.g. uint etc)

different hash distribution to store their data due to a different starting slot.

Array data is located starting at ``keccak256(p)`` and it is laid out in the same way as
statically-sized array data would: One element after the other, potentially sharing
storage slots if the elements are not longer than 16 bytes. Dynamic arrays of dynamic arrays apply this
rule recursively. The location of ``x[i][j]`` for ``x`` being ``uint32[][]`` is
computed as follows (again, assuming ``x`` itself is stored at slot ``p``):
The slot is ``keccak256(keccak256(p) + i) + floor(j / 8)`` (8 items per slot because 256/32 = 8) and
the element can be obtained from the slot data ``v`` using ``(v >> ((j % 8) * 32)) & 0xffffffff``.

The value corresponding to a mapping key ``k`` is located at ``keccak256(h(k) . p)``
where ``.`` is concatenation and ``h`` is a function that is applied to the key depending on its type:

- for value types, ``h`` pads the value to 32 bytes according to its alignment
- for strings and byte arrays, ``h`` computes the ``keccak256`` hash of the unpadded data.

If the mapping value is a

> non-value type, the location is the starting slot of the data. If the value is of struct type,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
non-value type, the computed slot marks the start of the data. If the value is of struct type,
```
?

for example, you have to add an offset corresponding the the struct member to reach the member.

> Let us compute the storage location of ``data[4][9].c`` in the following contract.

Reviewer: Maybe it's nicer to say
```
As an example, consider the following contract:

<Contract>

Let us compute the storage location of...
```

otherwise one needs to look/scroll down and then move back to understand this... but maybe fine...

.. _storage-hashed-encoding:

Due to their unpredictable size, mappings and dynamically-sized array types cannot be stored
"in between" the state variables preceding and following them.
Instead, they are considered to occupy only 32 bytes with regards to the
:ref:`rules above <storage-inplace-encoding>` and the actual data of mappings and

> dynamcically-sized arrays is stored starting at a different

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dynamically-sized arrays is stored starting at a different
```

> dynamcically-sized arrays is stored starting at a different

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:ref:`rules above <storage-inplace-encoding>` and the elements they contain are stored starting at a different
```

storage slot that is computed using a Keccak-256 hash.

> Assume the storage location of the mapping or array ends up being a slot ``p``

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Assume the storage location of the mapping or array content ends up being a slot ``p``
```

Author: But it's specifically not the content, right?

Reviewer 2: Ah, you're right. My bad.

Somehow I keep thinking about the content location when I see `storage location of` in the text.

after applying :ref:`the storage layout rules <storage-inplace-encoding>`.
For dynamic arrays,
this slot stores the number of elements in the array (byte arrays and
strings are an exception, see :ref:`below <bytes-and-string>`).
For mappings, the slot stays empty, but it is needed so that two mappings after each other will use a

> different hash distribution to store their data due to a different starting slot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For mappings, the slot stays empty, but it is still needed to ensure that even if there are
two mappings next to each other, their content ends up at different storage locations.
```

Array data is located starting at ``keccak256(p)`` and it is laid out in the same way as
statically-sized array data would: One element after the other, potentially sharing
storage slots if the elements are not longer than 16 bytes. Dynamic arrays of dynamic arrays apply this

> rule recursively. The location of ``x[i][j]`` for ``x`` being ``uint32[][]`` is

Reviewer 2: It applies to arrays in general, right?
```suggestion
storage slots if the elements are not longer than 16 bytes. This rule applies recursively to array elements.
The location of ``x[i][j]`` for ``x`` being ``uint32[][]`` is
```

Author: I'm not sure about this - there is no recursion to be applied for value types - we already fully explained that in the preceding sentence.

Reviewer 2: But there is for structs for example. In future also for enums with data. And for value types we apply recursion zero times so it still works :)

Anyway, it's not a big deal. Maybe it's clear enough even without this change.

> rule recursively. The location of ``x[i][j]`` for ``x`` being ``uint32[][]`` is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
storage slots if the elements are not longer than 16 bytes. Dynamic arrays of dynamic arrays apply this
rule recursively. The location of element ``x[i][j]``, where the type of ``x`` is ``uint32[][]``, is
```

computed as follows (again, assuming ``x`` itself is stored at slot ``p``):
The slot is ``keccak256(keccak256(p) + i) + floor(j / 8)`` (8 items per slot because 256/32 = 8) and

> the element can be obtained from the slot data ``v`` using ``(v >> ((j % 8) * 32)) & 0xffffffff``.

Reviewer 2: How about this?
```suggestion
rule recursively. The location of ``x[i][j]`` for ``x`` being ``uint32[][]`` is
computed as follows (again, assuming ``x`` itself is stored at slot ``p``):
The slot is ``keccak256(keccak256(p) + i) + floor(j / (256 / 32))`` and
the element can be obtained from the slot data ``v`` using ``(v >> ((j % (256 / 32)) * 32)) & type(uint32).max``.
```

> the element can be obtained from the slot data ``v`` using ``(v >> ((j % 8) * 32)) & 0xffffffff``.

Reviewer 2: I'd use something else than `uint32` to make sure no one get confused thinking that 32 in the equations has something to do with slots being 32-bytes wide.
```suggestion
rule recursively. The location of ``x[i][j]`` for ``x`` being ``uint64[][]`` is
computed as follows (again, assuming ``x`` itself is stored at slot ``p``):
The slot is ``keccak256(keccak256(p) + i) + floor(j / 4)`` (4 items per slot because 256/64 = 4) and
the element can be obtained from the slot data ``v`` using ``(v >> ((j % 4) * 64)) & 0xffffffffffffffff``.
```

Reviewer 2: And maybe it would be even better to use a type that would produce some left-over space in the slots to show how that works. E.g. `uint24`?

The value corresponding to a mapping key ``k`` is located at ``keccak256(h(k) . p)``
where ``.`` is concatenation and ``h`` is a function that is applied to the key depending on its type:

> - for value types, ``h`` pads the value to 32 bytes according to its alignment

Reviewer 2: We could clarify this a bit more:
```suggestion
- for value types, ``h`` pads the value to 32 bytes according to its alignment (value types are generally right aligned except for fixed bytes types).
```

BTW, is there anything other than `bytesXX` that is left-aligned?

Author: function types, I think.

Reviewer 2: Is that documented anywhere? Or is it considered an implementation detail?

Actually this document does not mention function types at all and I don't think we ever explain how much space they take (at least not [Types > Function Types](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/latest/types.html#index-13)). They don't take a full slot, right?

Reviewer 2: We discussed this on Discord. We do not have the size of function type documented anywhere (and maybe some other value types too, we need to check) but that's a separate issue.

- for strings and byte arrays, ``h`` computes the ``keccak256`` hash of the unpadded data.

If the mapping value is a
non-value type, the computed slot marks the start of the data. If the value is of struct type,

> for example, you have to add an offset corresponding the the struct member to reach the member.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for example, you have to add an offset corresponding to the struct member to reach the member.
```

As an example, consider the following contract:

::

    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >=0.4.0 <0.9.0;

    contract C {
        struct S { uint16 a; uint16 b; uint256 c; }
        uint x;
        mapping(uint => mapping(uint => S)) data;
    }

Let us compute the storage location of ``data[4][9].c``.
The position of the mapping itself is ``1`` (the variable ``x`` with 32 bytes precedes it).
This means ``data[4]`` is stored at ``keccak256(uint256(4) . uint256(1))``. The type of ``data[4]`` is
again a mapping and the data for ``data[4][9]`` starts at slot
``keccak256(uint256(9) . keccak256(uint256(4) . uint256(1)))``.
The slot offset of the member ``c`` inside the struct ``S`` is ``1`` because ``a`` and ``b`` are packed
in a single slot. This means the slot for
``data[4][9].c`` is ``keccak256(uint256(9) . keccak256(uint256(4) . uint256(1))) + 1``.

> The type of the value is ``uint256``, so it uses the full slot.

Reviewer 2: The emphasis here is on the fact that it does not take multiple slots, right? Any type would use the full slot anyway.
```suggestion
The type of the value is ``uint256``, so it uses a single slot.
```

Array data is located starting at ``keccak256(p)`` and it is laid out in the same way as
statically-sized array data would: One element after the other, potentially sharing
storage slots if the elements are not longer than 16 bytes. Dynamic arrays of dynamic arrays apply this
rule recursively. The location of element ``x[i][j]``, where the type of ``x`` is ``uint24[][]``, is
computed as follows (again, assuming ``x`` itself is stored at slot ``p``):
The slot is ``keccak256(keccak256(p) + i) + floor(j / (256 / 24))`` and

> the element can be obtained from the slot data ``v`` using ``(v >> ((j % (256 / 24)) * 24)) & type(uint24).max``.

Reviewer 2: For `uint24` the formula needs to be updated to account for the gaps.

Author: you mean add `floor` around the divisions?

Reviewer 2: Yeah. I see that just the inner floor was missing. Looks fine now.

``bytes`` and ``string``
------------------------

``bytes`` and ``string`` are encoded identically.
In general, the encoding is similar to ``byte1[]``, in the sense that there is a slot for the array itself and
a data area that is computed using a ``keccak256`` hash of that slot's position.

> For short values, though, the array elements are stored together with the length in the same slot.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For short values (shorter than 32 bytes) the array elements are stored together with the length in the same slot.
```

``bytes`` and ``string``
------------------------

``bytes`` and ``string`` are encoded identically.
In general, the encoding is similar to ``byte1[]``, in the sense that there is a slot for the array itself and
a data area that is computed using a ``keccak256`` hash of that slot's position.

> For short values (shorter than 32 bytes) the array elements are stored together with the length in the same slot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, for short values (shorter than 32 bytes) the array elements are stored together with the length in the same slot.
```
to emphasize it being *not* like ``byte1[]`` in that regard, maybe?
